.Dd April 18, 2026
.Dt AFP_CLIENT 1
.Os afpfs-ng
.Sh NAME
.Nm afp_client
.Nd Mount, unmount and control Apple Filing Protocol (AFP) sessions using the FUSE infrastructure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm mount Ns | Ns Cm status Ns | Ns Cm unmount Ns | Ns Cm suspend Ns | Ns Cm resume Ns | Ns Cm exit
.Op Ar options
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command allows you to perform some basic functions to
access AFP volumes, such as mount, unmount, get status, suspend and
resume.
.Pp
Do not confuse this with
.Xr afpcmd 1 ;
.Nm
is to be used only for the FUSE client,
in conjunction with
.Xr afpfsd 1 .
afpcmd, on the other hand, is an interactive CLI client
that can also be used for batch file transfers.
Both of them use the afpfs-ng libraries.
.Pp
The
.Xr mount_afpfs 1
command is in fact a symlink to
.Nm .
When invoked with a fully formed AFP URL, it will execute a FUSE mount command.
.Pp
Multiple volumes can be mounted simultaneously on all supported platforms.
Each mount request talks to a per-user manager daemon, which spawns a
per-mount afpfsd daemon that owns that FUSE mount.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm mount Oo Ar mount options Oc Ar server:volume Ar mountpoint
Using the authentication and server information provided with the mount
options, mount the remote filesystem on mountpoint.
For more information, see
the
.Sx MOUNT FLAGS
section later in this man page.
If you would prefer to use
the AFP URL syntax, see
.Xr mount_afpfs 1
for more information.
.It Cm unmount Ar mountpoint
Remove the AFP mount that is currently connected to
.Ar mountpoint .
.Pp
.Em NOTE :
When using macFUSE on macOS, it is recommended to use
.Xr umount 8
or the Finder to unmount AFP volumes.
.It Cm status
Show status summary of all connected servers.
.It Cm status Ar mountpoint
Show status information of the connected server for the specified mountpoint.
This will provide information on the connected server's IP address,
server descriptions (machine type, machine name, signature, login message)
and properties of the mounted volume.
It also provides statistics and other details useful for debugging.
.It Cm suspend Ar mountpoint
Suspends but does not unmount the connection to the server for the volume
mounted at
.Ar mountpoint .
This terminates the network connection but keeps the
mount active, useful for laptop suspend/resume scenarios.
.It Cm resume Ar mountpoint
Resumes the server connection for the volume mounted at
.Ar mountpoint .
Reconnects to the AFP server and restores the session.
.It Cm exit
Stop all mounts owned by the current user and shut down the manager
daemon.
It is recommended to run
.Cm unmount
on each mountpoint first.
.El
.Sh MOUNT FLAGS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a , Fl -uam Ar uam
Set the authentication method to one of the below options.
Short form first, formal protocol name in parentheses.
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Em guest ("No User Authent")
.It
.Em clrtxt ("Cleartxt Passwrd")
.It
.Em randnum ("Randnum Exchange")
.It
.Em randnum2 ("2-Way Randnum Exchange")
.It
.Em dhx ("DHCAST128")
.It
.Em dhx2 ("DHX2")
.It
.Em srp ("SRP")
.El
.Pp
If you do not specify a UAM, the most secure one common to both the
server and client (afpfs-ng) will be chosen.
.It Fl m , Fl -map Ar mapping
Set the method used to map local to server UID and GIDs.
Possible values are:
.Pp
.Em Common user directory
(or
.Em common )
- Use in environments where the UID
and GID of the client and server match perfectly, such as with NIS or LDAP.
.Pp
.Em Login ids
(or
.Em loginids )
- All files appear owned by the local user who
mounted the volume.
This is the safest option when client and server have
different user databases.
.It Fl O , Fl -options Ar options
Comma-separated list of mount options.
See
.Xr fuse 8
for more information.
.It Fl o , Fl -port Ar portnum
Use TCP
.Ar portnum
instead of the default, 548.
.It Fl p , Fl -pass Ar password
Password to authenticate with the AFP server. If not given, or if you specify a
.Sq -
as the password, you will be prompted for it. This is the more secure option.
.It Fl P , Fl -volpass Ar password
Use this if the volume you're accessing uses a volume password (a very
weak form of protection as it is transferred as clear text).
If you specify a
.Sq -
as the volume password, you will be prompted for it.
.It Fl u , Fl -user Ar username
Authenticate with the AFP server as
.Ar username .
.It Fl t , Fl -timeout Ar seconds
Override the default DSI request timeout.
If not specified, the timeout is selected automatically based on the
server type: Time Capsule servers default to 30 seconds to accommodate
spinning disk wake-up latency; all other server types default to 5 seconds.
.It Fl v , Fl -afpversion Ar afp_version
Specify the AFP protocol version that will be used for a mount.
By default afpfs-ng will choose the highest AFP version shared between
the client and server.
afpfs-ng supports AFP 2.0 up to 3.4.
.El
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
is part of the FUSE implementation of afpfs-ng.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr afpfsd 1 ,
.Xr mount_afpfs 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Alex deVries Aq Mt alexthepuffin@gmail.com
